---
title: Everything You Ever Wanted To Know About Authentication at Artsy (But Didn't Know How To Ask)
date: 2018-11-28
categories: [tech, oauth, security, infosec, authentication]
author: myk
layout: epic
comment_id: 506
---

Hi! Let's talk a little bit about user authentication. We'll discuss it through the context of authentication
within Artsy's ecosystem of applications, but ideally the same concepts will translate into other systems as well.
The goal here is to build an understanding of (1) what exactly authentication is, (2) how it works, and (3) how to
use artsy's specific infrastructure to delegate authentication for a new application to the existing ecosystem.

There are two primary authentication flows that we use at Artsy. We support _user authentication_ through
[OAuth](https://oauth.net/2/) to allow users to log into our applications by delegating authentication to Gravity,
our primarily application API. Alternately, we support _app authentication_ for those cases where an application
will only be called by other applications. We don't care about user authentication in this context, there's no need
to redirect to a login screen etc - we just need to establish permissions between services. In both cases you'll be
working with [JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)](https://jwt.io/introduction/), and the difference is how the token you're
looking at is generated.

User authentication happens at login - when the user provides their credentials to our server, our server confirms
that they are who they claim to be and then generates a cryptographically signed token that encodes a few facts
about that user.

App authentication, by contrast, all gets done in advance. We create the token manually, and share it with whatever
application we want to grant access to.

In this document we'll first develop an understanding of what OAuth is and how it works. Then we'll examine the
tokens we're using to get a better sense of what kind of information we have to work with. Finally, we'll go into
how to set up authentication for users and for applications, building on the knowledge we've established.

<!-- more -->

### OAuth

OAuth is a paradigm that allows one service to delegate authentication to another one. You've probably used this
before, even if you don't realize it. Whenever you use your
[Twitter account to log in to Medium](https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/basics/authentication/overview/oauth.html),
or your [Facebook account to log in to Tinder](https://developers.facebook.com/docs/facebook-login/web/), or
whatever, you're relying on delegated authentication. Medium doesn't have to know much about who you are as long as
they can trust Twitter to tell them, etc.

We use a similar approach here at Artsy. We've got dozens of applications, some outward-facing, some internal only.
If every single application had to handle its own authentication then we'd have user objects stored all over the
place and we'd be constantly trying to figure out if User 123 on service A is the same person as User 321 on
service B, etc, right? So instead we delegate authentication to a single core service which we call Gravity.
Gravity is Artsy's core API, and therefore is the canonical source of truth for user information.

So at a high level, OAuth works like this:

1. An HTTP request is sent to your server.
2. Your server checks for the presence of an `Authorization` HTTP header.
3. If it cannot find one, your server redirects the request to login through Gravity.
4. If the user logs in through Gravity, Gravity gathers a bunch of information about that user, cryptographically
   signs it, and gives it to the user to give your server by adding the token string to the user's `Authorization`
   header.
5. The user is then redirected back to your server, this time with the header that represents your access token.
6. Our access tokens are JWTs (they don't have to be - OAuth works with a simpler payload if you want - but by
   using JWTs we are able to include additional information in the payload.) so we can verify the key by decrypting
   the signature in the JWT using a key that your server shares with Gravity.
7. If that private key works and the header is decrypted, you can trust the information inside the JWT

There's a slight difference in authenticating a _user_ and authenticating a _trusted application_, as discussed
above. If our incoming request was generated by another Artsy service then we don't redirect anyone to gravity for
login - rather, we manually create the token in advance, and store it. Once this is set up, the above process exits
after step 2. But for now, let's continue looking at how user authentication works, because it's important to
understand the whole system. We'll circle back to app authentication at the end.

So!

Think about it this way: when the user is redirected to Gravity for login, Gravity gathers up a bunch of
information about who this user is. What's their user ID? What roles has their account been assigned? It lumps
these together to create a JWT, which is a short statement of identity verification. It sticks this JWT into the
user's headers - conceptually, think of this as a legal document or a letter of introduction - "The bearer of this
document is User 123. Sincerely, Gravity."

In fact, with OAuth the full header looks like this: `Authorization: Bearer <Signed JWT>`

So, what's in that JWT? That's a great question! First, let's talk briefly about how encryption works just to make
sure we're all on the same page about how we sign JWTs. Then we'll dig into our JWTs and how to use them to
provision access to parts of our applications.

#### Shared Secret

This document is not a guide to encryption, but a basic understanding of private key encryption is helpful to
understand how this stuff works. Let's say you have some message `MSG` and you want to encrypt it. You can use some
random secret key, let's call it `ABC`, to encrypt your message. There are a number of ways to do this, let's not
worry about the implementation - assume that you have access to a function called `encrypt(message, secret)`. So if
we want to encrypt our message, we can say `encrypt(MSG, ABC)` and we'll get back a string of meaningless
characters, let's call it `ENC`. The key here is that there also exists a function `decrypt(encrypted, secret)`,
such that as long as the secret is the same will convert your encrypted string back into its original state.
`decrypt(ENC, ABC) === MSG`

This is basically how security works on much of the internet, with various twists that optimize for different
things depending on what exactly is being secured and from whom. If you want to send a message out into the world
but you only want a specific person to be able to read it, you can encrypt it with your secret and then share the
secret with only those people that you want to allow to read your message.

This is what's going on with our `Authorization` token. Gravity generates a JWT which encodes some facts about the
user or application under discussion. It then signs that JWT using a secret key, and attaches the signed token to
the HTTP request using the `Authorization` header. You've got that same secret key in your application. This allows
your app to verify the signature of the `Authorization` token and get at the JWT that it contains.

Note: the JWT itself is not encrypted. Anyone can copy the JWT string and drop it into a [decoder](https://jwt.io).
Do not put anything sensitive into your JWT. Just put basic facts about the user. The encryption is just used to
sign it - you create an encrypted signature that can only be read by someone else who has the same private key.
This allows them to verify that the token was created by a trusted source - but the token payload is always
visible.

Let's dig a little bit deeper into what exactly JWTs are and how they work.

### JWT Details

A JWT (or JSON Web Token) has three components. Each is a base-64 encoded string containing some information. The
first part is the header - when you decode this back into a standard string you'll see that it just describes the
mechanisms whereby the token was generated, which allows a reader to decode it. The second is a small JSON object
that stores information about some subject. It has a small set of pre-defined fields, some of which we use, as well
as support for arbitrary custom fields. The third part is the signature - anyone who has the secret key can decode
the signature, which allows them to know for sure that the JWT was created by someone else who had that same secret
key.

Parts 1 and 3 are infrastructure - they tell a reader how to decode and verify the authenticity of a token. Part 2
is the actual payload, where relevant information gets stored. We don't really have to worry too much about 1 and
3 - those parts get handled for us through the libraries we're using. But let's look a little closer at part 2.

When Gravity generates a JWT for a user it
[specifies four fields 🔒](https://github.com/artsy/gravity/blob/master/app/models/util/user_trust.rb#L29-L34):

1. `sub` is part of the JWT spec and is short for `subject` - this encodes the subject of the token, in other words
   the user on whose behalf it's been generated.
2. `salt_hash` is a unique identifier for the given user with the given password within the gravity context.
3. `roles` is a string representing a comma-delimited list of the roles that the user has within the Artsy
   authentication structure.
4. `partner_ids` holds references to any Partner objects to which the user has access.

When Gravity generates a JWT for an application, on the other hand, it
[only specifies roles 🔒](https://github.com/artsy/gravity/blob/master/app/models/util/application_trust.rb#L14).
There is no subject - the fact that it was encoded using a secret relevant to our application is sufficient grounds
to know that it's about our application. Does that make sense? We don't need to specify a subject because if it was
generated for any other application we'd never be able to decrypt it. So we just need to know what roles this
application has been granted.

So when we decode the JWT in our application we get either a token that represents a trusted user or a token that
represents a trusted application. We need to know what to do with this JWT next, but before we do that we need to
set up our shared secrets so that our new app can verify the authenticity of decoded tokens.

Again, to reiterate: a JWT is not encrypted. It's publicly readable. Do not put anything too sensitive into your
JWTs.

If you'd like to learn more about how Artsy thinks about and uses JWTs you can read
[this blog post](http://artsy.github.io/blog/2016/10/26/jwt-artsy-journey/)

### Generating Secret Keys

So now we understand that our application is going to receive cryptographically signed JWTs from Gravity, and we
know that in theory as long as we have the same secret string that Gravity is using we should be able to verify
that these JWTs are trusted. But how do we share that secret?

Through brute force banality: we copy the secret from Gravity into an environment variable in our application.
First let's talk about how to generate the secret string on the gravity side, then we'll talk about how to set up
the application to use it. Note that we can allow Users to access our application via the first step here, but if
we want to allow access to trusted applications we need to use a second step, below.

#### Create a ClientApplication

The first thing we need to do is gain access to a Gravity console so that we can create a `ClientApplication`
instance. Gravity keeps track of every application for which it handles authentication, and it models them as
instances of the `ClientApplication` model. So if we're creating something called fooapp, we would have to do
something like this (this part of this essay is specific to Artsy's implementation details):

```ruby
  $ hokusai staging run --tty 'rails c'
  gravity:staging> ca = ClientApplication.create!(name: 'fooapp', access_granted: true, roles: ['artsy'], redirect_urls: ['http://localhost:5000','https://fooapp-staging.artsy.net'])
  => #<ClientApplication _id: 5bcf482dc95e4c0007bffeb7, created_at: 2018-10-23 16:11:25 UTC, updated_at: 2018-10-23 16:11:25 UTC, name: "fooapp", api_version: nil, app_id: "02a971b9401a317bf815", app_secret: "8b7d9b597428254f9305544b8cd4d710", internal_secret: "a111805fdfe2bb63b077ff65b71ebcd9", access_granted: true, redirect_urls: ["https://mydomain.artsy.net"], published_artworks_access_granted: false, roles: ["artsy"], user_id: nil>
```

Real quick, we passed a few important arguments into that `create!` method - we named our ClientApplication, we
specified that we want to enable access to it, we gave it a role and we set a few redirect_urls - these are OAuth
specific arguments that allow Gravity to redirect the user back to our app after they've authenticated (step 5
above).

(note we allow redirects to two urls, our staging instance and a local instance. A common workflow is to do local
dev while pointing at the staging gravity instance - by allowing redirects to localhost in our ClientApplication
we're allowing Gravity to support developers running their application locally in development.)

Once this client application has been created it's going to be used to generate a secret. There are two fields in
the ClientApplication that we're going to need - `app_id` and `app_secret`. These combine to create the secret key
that Gravity is going to use to sign our JWT, so we need to make sure that our app has access to these two values.

Go back to your app, open `_config.rb` and add the following:

```ruby
  config.app_id=ENV['APP_ID']
  config.app_secret=ENV['APP_SECRET']
  config.gravity_url=ENV['GRAVITY_URL']
```

Then in your `.env` file (or however you're managing environment variables) go ahead and set
`APP_ID=02a971b9401a317bf815`, `APP_SECRET=8b7d9b597428254f9305544b8cd4d710` and
`GRAVITY_URL=https://staging-api.artsy.net`. These values can now be accessed from `yourapp.config.app_id`,
`yourapp.config.app_secret` and `yourapp.config.gravity_url` - we're going to need these values to configure
ArtsyAuth in our new application.

This is enough, then, to enable user authentication! If we want to create application authentication we need to
take one more step.

#### Create a JWT for Application Trust

For users, JWTs are generated when they log in. But if we are trying to send HTTP requests from barapp to fooapp
we've established that no login is going to take place - so how does barapp get the JWT it needs to authenticate
against our fooapp? We're going to create it manually and store it in barapp's environment. Let's go back to our
Gravity console session - make sure `ca` is still defined. If you closed the session then before running the next
code you should get a reference to that client application. `ca = ClientApplication.where(name: 'fooapp').first`
should do it. Then:

```ruby
  gravity:staging> expires_in = 10.years.from_now
  gravity:staging> token = ApplicationTrust.create_for_token_authentication(ca, expires_in: expires_in)
```

This should generate a long string that it dumps to the console. Congratulations - that string is your JWT. Any
http request with the header `Authorization: Bearer <JWT>` will now be accepted by fooapp.

So to use this JWT, we copy the string into barapp's environment - often with a second environment variable for the
specific host we want to connect to. So in barapp you'd have environment variables like `FOO_JWT=<string>` and
`FOO_HOST=http://fooapp.artsy.net` or `FOO_HOST=http://fooapp-staging.artsy.net` or whatever. (We store the host as
an environment variable rather than having it in the code precisely so that we can target specific instances of the
application depending on the desired context).

Somewhere in barapp we'll have a service that sends HTTP requests to fooapp - we just have to make sure that those
requests have the authorization header with the correct signed token, and bam! We're authenticated!

So now it's time to put it all together - we know how to generate tokens, we know how to attach them to requests as
authorization headers, and we know how to decrypt them locally in fooapp. So now what? What do we do with those
tokens once we have them? That's where a useful library called ArtsyAuth comes in, at least if you're writing a
Ruby on Rails application here at Artsy.

### ArtsyAuth

We've seen now how OAuth uses JWTs and private-key encryption to allow one service to vouch for a user to another
service. But that's not quite enough - in our application, it's nice that we now have user data that we trust, but
what do we do with it? How do we configure our application to allow trusted users? Come to think of it, where do we
actually redirect unauthenticated users back to gravity to log in? OAuth is historically complex to set up
correctly, but fortunately ArtsyAuth is here to help. It abstracts out most of the OAuth complexity for us,
allowing us to focus on writing logic for what to do based on the JWT's actual values.

A simple ruby gem that handles all of this for you. Just `bundle add artsy-auth` and then create
`config/initializers/artsy_auth.rb`. It should look something like this:

```ruby
  ArtsyAuth.configure do |config|
    config.artsy_api_url = Osmosis.config.gravity_url # required
    config.application_id = Osmosis.config.app_id # required
    config.application_secret = Osmosis.config.app_secret # required
  end
```

Then, you include it in your application controller --

```ruby
class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
  # Prevent CSRF attacks by raising an exception.
  protect_from_forgery with: :exception

  # This will make sure calls to this controller have proper session data
  # if they don't it will redirect them to oauth url and once authenticated
  # on successful authentication we'll call authorized_artsy_token?
  include ArtsyAuth::Authenticated

  def authorized_artsy_token?(token)
    ArtsyAuthHelper.admin? token
  end
end
```

At this point, all you have to do is implement `authorized_artsy_token?` in the controller for the view you're
trying to protect. In the example above, we're delegating the logic to the ArtsyAuthHelper's `.admin?` method
(which checks for the 'admin' role in the JWT's `roles` field), but this can do whatever we want. We get a token
and we return a boolean. If we turn true, then the application can go about its way secure in the knowledge that
the person using it is allowed to do so. If we return false we either get a 403 or a redirection to Gravity to
assert our identity.

You can see how rather than checking for the admin role we could, say, check for a specific partner ID - or we
could restrict access to a specific subset of gravity users by manually checking the `sub` field against allowed
ID's. Whatever. The point is, we've set all of these things up to allow Gravity to tell us details about the entity
making an incoming request. It's still up to us to evaluate those details and provision access accordingly.

## Wrapping Up

Ideally this document has explained how authentication works at Artsy. We've talked about how Gravity encodes user-
and application-specific information into JWTs which it cryptographically signs. These JWTs get added to the
`Authorization` header of requests that get sent to our protected service - for users, the JWTs are generated when
they log in, and for trusted applications the JWTs are generated manually in advance, but either way requests end
up with an Authorization token whose signature can only be verified by an application with access to the secrets
used to sign it. We create a ClientApplication instance in Gravity specifically to get these secrets. Once we copy
those secrets to our new application, our new application can decrypt the value of the `Authorization` header on
any incoming requests bearing a token generated in Gravity for our application. We then add some logic to our
controller to determine which parts of the JWT we want to treat as salient for the purposes of access control.
